Edit the changelog for release (#1424)
PennyLaneAI/catalyst: doc/releases/changelog-0.10.0.md

<h3>New features since last release</h3>

* Catalyst can now load and apply local MLIR plugins from the PennyLane frontend.
  [(#1287)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1287)
  [(#1317)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1317)
  [(#1361)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1361)
  [(#1370)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1370)

  Custom compilation passes and dialects in MLIR can be specified for use in Catalyst via a shared

>   object (`*.so` or `*.dylib` on MacOS) that implements the pass. Details on creating your own

Reviewer: I believe the OS name is normally stylized as "macOS"

```suggestion
  object (`*.so` or `*.dylib` on macOS) that implements the pass. Details on creating your own
```

  plugin can be found in our
  [compiler plugin documentation](https://docs.pennylane.ai/projects/catalyst/en/stable/dev/plugins.html).

>   At a high level, there are three ways to utilize a plugin once it's properly specified:

Reviewer: I've always found "utilize" too verbose where writing "use" works just as well.

```suggestion
  At a high level, there are three ways to use a plugin once it's properly specified:
```

>   - :func:`~.passes.apply_pass` can be used on QNodes when there is a

Reviewer: Side note: the documentation for [`apply_pass`](https://xanaduai-pennylane--1424.com.readthedocs.build/projects/catalyst/en/1424/code/api/catalyst.passes.apply_pass.html) and [`apply_pass_plugin`](https://xanaduai-pennylane--1424.com.readthedocs.build/projects/catalyst/en/1424/code/api/catalyst.passes.apply_pass_plugin.html) is quite sparse. Maybe not a blocker for the release, but it would be helpful to have this filled in at some point.

Author: True I looked at those too, but Erick is fixing that already :)

Reviewer: Great, thanks!

    [Python entry point](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/entry-points/)

>     defined for the plugin. In that case, the plugin and pass should both be specified and separated
>     by a `.`.

Reviewer: "separated by a `.` ." might not be so readable in the final rendering, maybe spelling it out as "period" would be better?

```suggestion
    defined for the plugin. In that case, the plugin and pass should both be specified and separated
    by a period.
```

        return qnode()
    ```

>   - :func:`~.passes.apply_pass_plugin` can be used on QNodes when the plugin did define an entry

Author: ```suggestion
  - :func:`~.passes.apply_pass_plugin` can be used on QNodes when the plugin did not define an entry
```

        return qnode()
    ```

  - Alternatively, one or more dialect and pass plugins can be specified in advance in the
    :func:`~.qjit` decorator, via the `pass_plugins` and `dialect_plugins` keyword arguments. The
    :func:`~.passes.apply_pass` function can then be used without specifying the plugin.

    ```python
    from pathlib import Path

    plugin = Path("shared_object_file.so")

    @catalyst.passes.apply_pass("pass_name")
    @qml.qnode(qml.device("lightning.qubit", wires=0))
    def qnode():
      qml.Hadamard(wires=0)
      return qml.state()

    @qml.qjit(pass_plugins=[plugin], dialect_plugins=[plugin])
    def module():
      return qnode()
    ```

  For more information on usage, visit our
  [compiler plugin documentation](https://docs.pennylane.ai/projects/catalyst/en/stable/dev/plugins.html).

<h3>Improvements 🛠</h3>

> * The Catalyst CLI introduced in `v0.9` without being included in binary distributions (wheels)

Reviewer: Suggestion:

```suggestion
* The Catalyst CLI introduced in `v0.9`, which was not included in the binary distributions (wheels),
```

> * The Catalyst CLI introduced in `v0.9` without being included in binary distributions (wheels)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The Catalyst command-line interface (CLI) introduced in `v0.9` without being included in binary distributions (wheels)
```

Optional

Author: Well the idea was that "Catalyst CLI" is the name of the tool, although I'm happy to include the expanded form in a different place in the text.

>   is now available as the `catalyst` command from the terminal after Pip installing Catalyst. The

Author: I will add a small PR to clean up the naming of the command in the repo and make it available from the command line.

> * The Catalyst CLI introduced in `v0.9` without being included in binary distributions (wheels)
>   is now available as the `catalyst` command from the terminal after Pip installing Catalyst. The

Reviewer: Suggestion (not sure if there's a standard convention for describing a pip installation):

```suggestion
* The Catalyst CLI introduced in `v0.9` without being included in binary distributions (wheels)
  is now available as the `catalyst` command from the terminal after installing Catalyst with pip. The
```

Author: https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1424/commits/37a628222dddda08cb053337c413076c000bc6d8

>   full documentation is available
>   [here](https://docs.pennylane.ai/projects/catalyst/en/stable/catalyst-cli/catalyst-cli.html).

Reviewer: Feel free to reword, mainly wanted the link text to be explicit in what it's pointing to.

```suggestion
  full usage instructions are available in the 
  [Catalyst CLI documentation](https://docs.pennylane.ai/projects/catalyst/en/stable/catalyst-cli/catalyst-cli.html).
```

>   is now available as the `catalyst` command from the terminal after Pip installing Catalyst. The
>   full documentation is available
>   [here](https://docs.pennylane.ai/projects/catalyst/en/stable/catalyst-cli/catalyst-cli.html).

Reviewer 2: I might add a small blurb on what the Catalyst CLI is useful for 🤔. Suggestion:

```suggestion
  is now available as the `catalyst` command from the terminal after Pip-installing Catalyst. It is a useful
  tool for developers, as it allows for dissecting each stage of compilation—MLIR-level optimizations, translation 
  to LLVM IR, and low-level LLVM IR optimizations—in compact user interface that lives outside of the 
  Python frontend. The full documentation is available
  [here](https://docs.pennylane.ai/projects/catalyst/en/stable/catalyst-cli/catalyst-cli.html).
```

Author: Yeah I was going to write up a whole description for it but it turns out this was already advertised in the previous release, so this is just an update on that.

Author: Added a little more context: https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1424/commits/37a628222dddda08cb053337c413076c000bc6d8

  [(#1285)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1285)
  [(#1368)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1368)
  [(#1405)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1405)

* Lightning devices now support finite-shot expectation values of `qml.Hermitian` when used with
  Catalyst.
  [(#451)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/451)

* The PennyLane state preparation template `qml.CosineWindow` is now compatible with Catalyst.
  [(#1166)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1166)

* A development distribution of Python with dynamic linking support (`libpython.so`) is no longer
  needed in order to use :func:`~.debug.compile_executable` to generate standalone executables of
  compiled programs.
  [(#1305)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1305)

> * In Catalyst v0.9.0 the output of the compiler instrumentation (:func:`~.debug.instrumentation`)

Reviewer: Minor: elsewhere we've used "`v0.9`", while here we're using "v0.9.0"; could we use a consistent style?

Author: ```suggestion
* In Catalyst `v0.9` the output of the compiler instrumentation (:func:`~.debug.instrumentation`)
```

  had inadvertently been made more verbose by printing timing information for each run of each pass.
  This change has been reverted. Instead, the :func:`~.qjit` option `verbose=True` will now instruct
  the instrumentation to produce this more detailed output.
  [(#1343)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1343)

> * Two additional circuit optimizations have been added to Catalyst: `disentangle-CNOT` and

Reviewer 2: Might be nice to include a small code example here, but not sure what the standard is for verbosity/thoroughness of outlining new features in the Catalyst changelog. I'm also wondering if this should be moved up into the new features section 🤔...

Author: To be honest I don't know if these will have any effect in many user programs, I wouldn't advertise these peephole optimizations as a useful user feature until we've built out the optimization infrastructure in Catalyst more and we've confirmed their effectiveness.

  `disentangle-SWAP`. The optimizations are available via the :mod:`~.passes` module.
  [(#1154)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1154)

  The optimizations use a finite state machine to propagate limited qubit state information through
  the circuit to turn CNOT and SWAP gates into cheaper instructions. The pass is based on the work
  by J. Liu, L. Bello, and H. Zhou, _Relaxed Peephole Optimization: A Novel Compiler Optimization
  for Quantum Circuits_, 2020, [arXiv:2012.07711](https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.07711).

<h3>Breaking changes 💔</h3>

> * The minimum supported PennyLane version has been updated `v0.40`, backwards compatibility in
>   either direction is not maintained.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The minimum supported PennyLane version has been updated to `v0.40`; backwards compatibility in
  either direction is not maintained.
```

  [(#1308)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1308)

> * (Device Developers Only) The way the `shots` parameter is initialized in C++ device backends is

Author: These two entries are not breaking changes for users, but they are breaking changes in the public device api, so I indicated this with `(Device Developers Only)`.

  Similarly, the `Sample` and `Counts` functions (and their `Partial*` equivalents) will no longer
  provide a `shots` argument, since they are redundant. The signature of these functions will update
  in the next release.

* (Device Developers Only) The `toml`-based device schemas have been integrated with PennyLane and
  updated to a new version `schema = 3`.
  [(#1275)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1275)

  Devices with existing TOML `schema = 2` will not be compatible with the current release of
  Catalyst until updated. A summary of the most importation changes is listed here:
  - `operators.gates.native` renamed to `operators.gates`
  - `operators.gates.decomp` and `operators.gates.matrix` are removed and no longer necessary
  - `condition` property is renamed to `conditions`
  - Entries in the `measurement_processes` section now expect the full PennyLane class name as
    opposed to the deprecated `mp.return_type` shorthand (e.g. `ExpectationMP` instead of `Expval`).
  - The `mid_circuit_measurements` field has been replaced with `supported_mcm_methods`, which
    expects a list of mcm methods that the device is able to work with (or empty if unsupported).

>   - A new field is added, `overlapping_observables`, which indicates whether a device supports

Reviewer: To keep the tense consistent with the rest of the entries:

```suggestion
  - A new field has been added, `overlapping_observables`, which indicates whether a device supports
```

>     multiple measurements during one execution on overlapping overlapping wires.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    multiple measurements during one execution on overlapping wires.
```

>   - The `options` section is removed. Instead, the Python device class should define a

Reviewer: Ditto:

```suggestion
  - The `options` section has been removed. Instead, the Python device class should define a
```

    `device_kwargs` field holding the name and values of C++ device constructor kwargs.

  See the [Custom Devices page](https://docs.pennylane.ai/projects/catalyst/en/latest/dev/custom_devices.html)
  for the most up-to-date information on integrating your device with Catalyst and PennyLane.

<h3>Bug fixes 🐛</h3>

* Fixed a bug introduced in Catalyst `v0.8` that breaks nested invocations of `qml.adjoint` and
  `qml.ctrl` (e.g. `qml.adjoint(qml.adjoint(qml.H(0)))`).
  [(#1301)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/issues/1301)

* Fixed a bug in :func:`~.debug.compile_executable` when using non-64bit arrays as input to the
  compiled function, due to incorrectly computed stride information.
  [(#1338)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1338)

<h3>Internal changes ⚙️</h3>

> * Starting with Python 3.12, Catalyst's binary distributions (wheels) will now follow Python's

Author: All stable ABI changes have been regrouped here

> * Starting with Python 3.12, Catalyst's binary distributions (wheels) will now follow Python's
>   Stable ABI, eliminating the need for a separate wheel per minor Python version. To enable this,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Starting with Python 3.12, Catalyst's binary distributions (wheels) will now follow Python's
  [Stable ABI](https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/stable.html), eliminating the need for a separate wheel per minor Python version. To enable this,
```

  the following changes have made:

  - Stable ABI wheels are now generated for Python 3.12 and up.
    [(#1357)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1357)
    [(#1385)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1385)

  - Pybind11 has been replaced with nanobind for C++/Python bindings across all components.
    [(#1173)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1173)
    [(#1293)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1293)
    [(#1391)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1391)
    [(#624)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/624)

    Nanobind has been developed as a natural successor to the pybind11 library and offers a number
    of [advantages](https://nanobind.readthedocs.io/en/latest/why.html#major-additions) like its

>     ability to target Python's [stable ABI interface](https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/stable.html)

Reviewer: Probably better to link to the Stable ABI documentation the first time it's mentioned, rather than down here.

```suggestion
    ability to target Python's Stable ABI.
```

    starting with Python 3.12.

  - Python C-API calls have been replaced with functions from Python's Limited API.
    [(#1354)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1354)

>   - The MLIR `QuantumExtension` module — previously implemented with pybind11 - has been removed.

Reviewer: Mix of dashes and hyphens:

```suggestion
  - The MLIR `QuantumExtension` module—previously implemented with pybind11—has been removed.
```

Reviewer: Yes it's hard to catch with a monospace font!

Using commas to surround the parenthetical expression is fine here. Depending on the sort of emphasis you want, it's also common to see them surrounded by em dashes "—", usually without extra spaces, like so:

> Catalyst—developed by Xanadu— is used for compiling quantum programs.

Author: Went with the commas and slight rewording: https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1424/commits/37a628222dddda08cb053337c413076c000bc6d8

    This  module was never included in the distributed wheels and could not be converted to

>     nanobind easily due to its dependency on upstream MLIR code. Pybind11 does not support the
>     stable Python ABI.

Reviewer: For consistency:

```suggestion
    nanobind easily due to its dependency on upstream MLIR code. Pybind11 does not support the
    Python Stable ABI.
```

    [(#1187)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1187)

* Catalyst no longer depends on or pins the `scipy` package. Instead, OpenBLAS is sourced directly

>   from [`scipy-openblas32`](https://pypi.org/project/scipy-openblas32/) or

Reviewer: This isn't rendering correctly in the built docs, although I'm not sure how to fix it (might be easiest just to remove the backticks).

Author: Yeah, not sure if link + code makes sense (although I think have seen it work in some places before).
```suggestion
  from [scipy-openblas32](https://pypi.org/project/scipy-openblas32/) or
```

  places where it's required.
  [(#1332)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1332)
  [(#1337)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1337)

* Each QNode now has its own transformation schedule. Instead of relying on the name of the QNode,
  each QNode now has a transformation module, which denotes the transformation schedule, embedded in
  its MLIR representation.
  [(#1323)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1323)

* The `apply_registered_pass_p` primitive has been removed and the API for scheduling passes to run
  using the transform dialect has been refactored. In particular, passes are appended to a tuple as
  they are being registered and they will be run in order. If there are no local passes, the global
  `pass_pipeline` is scheduled. Furthermore, this commit also reworks the caching mechanism for
  primitives, which is important as qnodes and functions are primitives and now that we can apply
  passes to them, they are distinct based on which passes have been scheduled to run on them.
  [(#1317)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1317)

* The Catalyst infrastructure has been upgraded to support a dynamic `shots` parameter for quantum

>   execution. Previously, this value had to a static compile-time constant, and could not be changed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  execution. Previously, this value had to be a static compile-time constant, and could not be changed
```

  once the program was compiled. Upcoming UI changes will make the feature accessible to users.
  [(#1360)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1360)

> * Several changes for experimental support of trapped-ion OQD devices have been made, including:

Author: All OQD changes have been regrouped here

  [(#1317)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1317)

* Python C-API calls have been replaced with Stable ABI calls.
  [(#1354)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1354)
* The Catalyst infrastructure has been upgraded to support a dynamic `shots` parameter for quantum
  execution. Previously, this value had to a static compile-time constant, and could not be changed
  once the program was compiled. Upcoming UI changes will make the feature accessible to users.
  [(#1360)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1360)

* A framework for loading and interacting with databases containing hardware information and
  calibration data for Open Quantum Design (OQD) trapped-ion quantum devices has been added.
  [(#1348)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1348)
* Several changes for experimental support of trapped-ion OQD devices have been made, including:

  A new module, `catalyst.utils.toml_utils`, was also added to assist in loading information from
  these databases, which are stored as text files in TOML format. In particular, this module
  contains a new function, :func:`~.utils.toml_utils.safe_eval`, to safely evaluate mathematical

>   expressions:

Author: @joeycarter I dropped this entry because that code was reverted right?

Reviewer: @paul0403 rewrote the OQD "database manager" utilities using toml++ in #1372, however we never did remove the pure-Python implementation mentioned here, since we thought there might be a chance they prove useful as we continued developing OQD. Although, as with other OQD modules, these aren't shipped in the wheels.

However, we _are_ keeping `catalyst.utils.toml_utils`, and I think it should definitely be included in the changelog (although I can see putting it in its own entry).

Author: Thanks for info, will update the changelog then!

Author: Actually should we just remove that file then if it's completely unused? They can always be brought back if needed in the future.

Reviewer: Yes I think we should remove it. I was hesitating at first because I thought we still had pytests for the `oqd_database_managers` module that we had marked to skip, but I see we removed them entirely in #1390. So there is nothing in the codebase that references anything in this module anymore. I'll open a PR to remove it.

Reviewer: I've opened #1427 to remove the `oqd_database_managers` module.

>     lowering to OQD's backend calls. The physical parameters, which are typically be obtained from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    lowering to OQD's backend calls. The physical parameters, which are typically obtained from
```

>     `--quantum-to-ion` conversion. The TOML filepaths are taken in as pass options.

Author: This could still be considered too much information tbh

>   [(#1194)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1194)

Author: Could even consider dropping this entry entirely

Reviewer: Personally, I'd leave the original text as is:

> The readability of conditional passes in `catalyst.pipelines` has been improved.

Author: Yeah I struggled on this one, but the original has little context an external person reading that has no idea what is it actually about? Note that the changelog is not for us, but external users and developers.

Reviewer: I'll leave it to you :slightly_smiling_face:.

I would either go with the original text or remove it; "A small refactor of code ..." is probably even less informative to a user. At the very least, the original text leaves the "breadcrumb trail" of what changes were made in a release, even if they're not of interest to a user.

Author: Gave it another shot: https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1424/commits/37a628222dddda08cb053337c413076c000bc6d8

Reviewer: Looks good! :rocket:

  Catalyst.
  [(#451)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/451)

* The PennyLane state preparation template `qml.CosineWindow` is now compatible with Catalyst.
  [(#1166)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1166)

* A development distribution of Python with dynamic linking support (`libpython.so`) is no longer
  needed in order to use :func:`~.debug.compile_executable` to generate standalone executables of
  compiled programs.
  [(#1305)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1305)

* In Catalyst `v0.9` the output of the compiler instrumentation (:func:`~.debug.instrumentation`)
  had inadvertently been made more verbose by printing timing information for each run of each pass.
  This change has been reverted. Instead, the :func:`~.qjit` option `verbose=True` will now instruct
  the instrumentation to produce this more detailed output.
  [(#1343)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1343)

* Two additional circuit optimizations have been added to Catalyst: `disentangle-CNOT` and
  `disentangle-SWAP`. The optimizations are available via the :mod:`~.passes` module.

>   [(#1154)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1154)

Author: ```suggestion
  [(#1154)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1154)
  [(#1407)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1407)
```

  compiled function, due to incorrectly computed stride information.
  [(#1338)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1338)

<h3>Internal changes ⚙️</h3>

* Starting with Python 3.12, Catalyst's binary distributions (wheels) will now follow Python's
  [Stable ABI](https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/stable.html), eliminating the need for a separate
  wheel per minor Python version. To enable this, the following changes have made:

  - Stable ABI wheels are now generated for Python 3.12 and up.
    [(#1357)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1357)
    [(#1385)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1385)

  - Pybind11 has been replaced with nanobind for C++/Python bindings across all components.
    [(#1173)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1173)
    [(#1293)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1293)
    [(#1391)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/1391)
    [(#624)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst/pull/624)

    Nanobind has been developed as a natural successor to the pybind11 library and offers a number
    of [advantages](https://nanobind.readthedocs.io/en/latest/why.html#major-additions) like its

>     ability to target Python's Stable ABI.
>     starting with Python 3.12.

Author: ```suggestion
    ability to target Python's Stable ABI starting with Python 3.12.
```
